---
tags: BMMB554, Block1
---

# Lecture 7: Working with the shell

In this lecture, we will gain some familiarity with the Unix shell (i.e., the command line). Working with the shell is necessary to do many data analysis tasks. For example, many bioinformatics software tools are only available in command line form. Similarly, many high-performance computing resources will not have a GUI interface for you to interact with; you will instead have to log in via ssh into a command line interface. And most importantly, the shell will enable you to automate complex data analysis tasks and have them execute in a reproducible way.

Many of the items we will cover today are based on the [Software Carpentry Unix Shell workshop](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/). I recommend that you go through that entire tutorial at your own pace. 

## Setting up the shell

First, let's get set up with a Unix-like shell on your own system.

**MacOS:**
If you have a Mac, you already have a built-in shell. Search for "Terminal" in Spotlight.

**Windows:**

*Windows version 10+*
You can install the Windows Subsystem for Linux which gives access to a Bash shell command-line tool in Windows 10. You should be able to do so by opening Powershell from an administrator account and typing the following:
```
wsl --install
```
[More detailed instructions here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install), but the above line should be all you need for now.

*Older Windows machines, or no admin access*
As an alternative to Windows Subsystem for Linux, you can install a Bash emulator via [Git for Windows](https://gitforwindows.org/).
